<!DOCTYPE html><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops"><head><meta xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" /><style type="text/css">
    .vsthighlight {
      cursor: pointer;
    }
  undefined</style><link xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" rel="stylesheet" href="9781531002909.css" /></head><body>
<div xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="border">
<h1 class="TOC0CT"><a id="page_xxxix"></a><a id="ack"></a><b>Acknowledgments</b></h1>
</div>
<p xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="text">Thanks to Susan Duncan, Dean of the University of Louisville Louis D. Brandeis School of Law and to University of Louisville for institutional support in preparing this edition.</p>
<p xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="text">Thanks to Elaine Shoben for suggesting Ann McGinley as coauthor beginning with the 5th edition.</p>
<p xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="text">To Kea Middleton and Rita Siegwald for their administrative assistance in preparing the manuscript, to Julia Irzyk and Lisa Goldberg for their research support.</p>
<p xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="text">To Charles B. Craver, Freda H. Alverson Professor of Law at George Washington University, for encouraging and supporting publication of the first edition of this book.</p>
<p xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="text">To Joe Smith, Bonnie Tucker, Lex Frieden, Wendy Wilkinson, Peg Nosek, Laurie Gerken Redd, the late Kathleen DeSilva, and the late Gretchen George, my thanks for challenging me to think about these issues from their unique perspectives. A similar thanks to all of the students with disabilities who have helped me to consider how to address the challenges they face in new and creative ways.</p>
<p xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="text">To the late Paul Steven Miller, Jan Sheldon Sherman, Ilene Shane, Elaine Roberts, Rud Turnbull, Michael Perlin, Robert Silverstein, Peter Blanck, Chai Feldblum, Larry Gostin, Scott Lissner, Jim Kessler, and John Wodatch for their positive influence, in my work on disability law.</p>
<p xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="text">To my former colleagues Mary Anne Bobinski, Ron Turner, Mary Anderlik, and Bill Winslade for their insights.</p>
<p xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="text">To my current colleague, Sam Marcosson, thanks for engaging in thought provoking discussions about disability law.</p>
<p xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="text">Special acknowledgements to Stanley Herr, a law professor at the University of Maryland, who died in 2001. Stan had been involved in several important disability rights issues, including special education, deinstitutionalization, mental health histories for professional licensing, and prohibition of execution of individuals with intellectual disabilities. And to Adam Milani, a law professor at Mercer University, who died in 2005. Adam and I shared an interest in writing about sports and disability law, and a mutual respect for each other's work. Their advocacy and intellect are missed, but their work has enabled others to build on the foundations they have laid.</p>
<p xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="text">Additional special acknowledgement to my friend, the late H. Joan Ehrlich, who served in leadership positions within the EEOC until she died in December 2008. Her proactive approach to educating and informing everyone about employment discrimination was extremely valuable and is greatly missed.</p>
<p xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="text"><a id="page_xl"></a>In summer 2009, the world lost the great Senator Edward Kennedy. His constant, unfailing and effective leadership is responsible for most of the major legislation providing protection and rights for individuals with disabilities. He inspired many to make sure that the “dream lives on.”</p>
<p xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="text">And finally, as always, I thank my parents, Dorothy Friesen and the late Eric J. Friesen, for their constant support and example; to my daughters, Julia and Lisa for their patience; and to Mark, my husband and colleague for his valuable contributions and suggestions on issues of employment, genetics, and privacy.</p>
<p xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="noindent"><i>Laura Rothstein</i></p>
<p xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" style="text-align:center; margin-top:1pc"></p>
<p xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="text">Thanks to Dean Dan Hamilton, current dean of the William S. Boyd School of Law, University of Nevada, Las Vegas, and Chancellor John White, former dean of the William S. Boyd School of Law and current Chancellor of the Nevada System of Higher Education, for supporting this project.</p>
<p xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="text">Thanks also to Jeanne Price, Associate Dean for Academic Affairs, Professor of Law, and Director of the Wiener-Rogers Law Library at Boyd School of Law, UNLV, who supported this project wholeheartedly. Thanks also to David McClure, Associate Director of the Wiener-Rogers Law Library, and to library faculty Chad Schatzle, and Jennifer Gross and to Boyd law students for their excellent and very quick research.</p>
<p xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="text">Thanks to my colleagues at UNLV, Boyd School of Law for supporting this project, especially Elaine Shoben, Terry Pollman, Linda Edwards, and Jeff Stempel.</p>
<p xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="text">Thanks to Nettie Mann, our amazing administrative assistant, who has worked on this book and so many other projects at UNLV Boyd School of Law.</p>
<p xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="text">Thanks to those students, friends, and family members who live with disabilities and have helped me understand the difficulties they face and the important and creative role that law and understanding can play in helping them live and soar with those disabilities.</p>
<p xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="text">Special thanks go to my mother, Mary McGinley, who turned ninety-seven years old as I was preparing this manuscript, and who never wavered in her support, to my late father, Paul McGinley, a lawyer's lawyer who gave me courage as a child to be what I wanted to be, to my brother and sisters, Paul, Laurie and Ellin, who are always supportive of my projects.</p>
<p xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="text">Special thanks to Jeff Stempel, my colleague and husband, for his valuable contributions, especially on issues of insurance and disabilities, and to my children, Ryan, Shanen, and Reed for helping me understand what young adults need in order to learn.</p>
<p xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="text">Both of us thank Keith Moore and Sean Caldwell of Carolina Academic Press for their timely and considerable efforts and support.</p>
<p xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="text">Finally, thank you to Laura Rothstein, my amazing, knowledgeable coauthor. It is a pleasure to work with you.</p>
<p xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="noindent"><i>Ann McGinley</i></p>
</body></html>